# Microhaplotype Analysis
As with the main analysis, this workflow comes with no guarantees of usefulness. This workflow is currently under development.       

#### Requirements: ####
This workflow should work on either linux or mac OS.      
[bwa](https://github.com/lh3/bwa)       
[samtools](https://samtools.sourceforge.net)      
[bcftools](https://samtools.github.io/bcftools/bcftools.html)       
[bedtools](https://bedtools.readthedocs.io/en/latest/)        
[fastqc](https://www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/projects/fastqc/)      
[multiqc](https://multiqc.info)    
[microTyper](https://github.com/delomast/microTyper)      


### General Comments ###
To identify novel variants, the following approach will be taken:      
(1) create an amplicon-only reference genome to align against (one contig = one mhap);      
(2) align amplicon panel fastq.gz results against the amplicon-only reference;       
(3) call variants from the above, produce a VCF file with all samples;       
(4) inspect VCF file, filter as needed;      
(5) use bam and VCF files to generate microhaplotypes.      


## Getting started ##
Clone this repository and change into the main directory.      
```
git clone https://github.com/bensutherland/amplitools.git
cd amplitools

```

### 01. Generate amplicon-only assembly ###
Downstream application will assume that each contig is a single microhaplotype, and so it is necessary to create a amplicon sequence-only reference.      

Obtain the regions file and reference genome sourced from [amplitargets](https://github.com/bensutherland/amplitargets), and put in `00_archive`.     

Extract the amplicon sequence only and index, as demonstrated for Pacific oyster:     
```
# Decompress the fasta
gunzip 00_archive/GCA_000297895.1_oyster_v9_genomic.fna.gz      

# Create amplicon-only fasta  
bedtools getfasta -fi 00_archive/GCA_000297895.1_oyster_v9_genomic.fna -bed 00_archive/WGAG22008_BJS_OYRv01_Region_A.bed > 00_archive/cgig_v.1.0_amplicon_ref.fna

# index the newly created fasta for downstream alignments
bwa index 00_archive/cgig_v.1.0_amplicon_ref.fna

```       


### 02. Prepare sample data ###
Obtain per-sample demultiplexed fastq data from the AmpliSeq provider, and copy it into the folder `12_input_mhap`.         

To save space, compress files if they are not compressed already (required):     
`gzip *.fastq`    

Before proceeding, determine the number of reads in each fastq file:       
`01_scripts/count_reads.sh`       
...note: adjust variable SUFFIX if your files do not have the suffix '.fastq.gz'.       

Aside: if the per-sample data is in bam format, convert it to fq.gz:     
`01_scripts/bamtofastq.sh`      

#### Select best replicate
Prepare an interpretation file, entitled `00_archive/filename_to_sample_map.txt`, with column headers `filename` and `sample_id`, where the filename is the fastq.gz name for each file (without path), and the sample id is the name of the sample (this would be identical for replicates). The next step requires that you also have a reads per sample table generated by the script above.    

In RStudio, source amplitools initiator, then run the following:      
```
select_best_rep_fastq(input_folder = "12_input_mhap", metadata.FN = "00_archive/filename_to_sample_map.txt", counts.FN = "12_input_mhap/reads_per_sample_table.txt")         
```

Then in terminal, run the following to move any file that was not set to be retained into the removed files folder:     
```
for file in $(cat 12_input_mhap/remove_files.txt); do mv "$file" 12_input_mhap/removed_files/; done
```

Next, add any manually-selected files that you would like to keep in the analysis into the `12_input_mhap` folder. If these files are paired-end, put the R2 files into the `removed_files` subfolder, and only use the R1 file to match the amplicon panel output data.    


### 03. Quality check ###
Use fastqc/ multiqc to evaluate quality:      
```
fastqc 12_input_mhap/*.fastq.gz -o 12_input_mhap/fastqc_raw -t 4 
multiqc -o 12_input_mhap/fastqc_raw/ 12_input_mhap/fastqc_raw/    
``` 

### 04. Align samples against reference genome ### 
Update the variable for the reference genome, then run the following script:       
`01_scripts/bwa_mem_align_reads.sh 12`       
Requires that the sample filename suffix is .fastq.gz     
Note: this will align, sort, index, and generate idxstats. It will add read group IDs to samples, as these are required for downstream analyses.      

idxstats provides a tab-delimited output with each line consisting of a reference sequence name, the sequence length, the number of mapped read segments, and the number of unmapped read-segments.     

Aligned output will be in `13_mapped_mhap`.       

To inspect the number of reads and number of alignments per sample:    
`01_scripts/assess_results.sh` will produce summary tables in each folder.     


### 05. Call variants from the aligned samples ###
Variants will be called from the aligned samples as follows:      
```
# Prepare a list of all sorted bam files
ls -1 13_mapped_mhap/*.sorted.bam > 13_mapped_mhap/bamlist.txt

# Merge bam files
samtools merge 13_mapped_mhap/all_merged.bam -b 13_mapped_mhap/bamlist.txt --threads 6

# Index the reference genome
samtools faidx 00_archive/cgig_v.1.0_amplicon_ref.fna      

```

Call variants with mpileup by updating any variables and running:       
`./01_scripts/call_variants.sh`     
Output will be in `14_extract_mhap`.         


### 06. Filter the called variants ###
Automated filtering:     
`01_scripts/filter_bcf.sh`     


Conduct light filtering:     
`bcftools view -i 'F_missing < 0.1 & TYPE="snp" & QUAL>=20 & FORMAT/DP>10' --min-alleles 2 --max-alleles 2 14_extract_mhap/mpileup_calls.bcf -Ob -o 14_extract_mhap/mpileup_calls_SNP_only_biallelic_q20_dp10_Fmiss_0.1.bcf`

Settings:   
F_missing:      fraction of missing genotypes per locus
TYPE="snp":     keep only SNPs
QUAL:           SNP quality value
DP:             depth (per sample; #TODO: confirm)
--min-alleles:  at least this many alleles observed per locus
--max-alleles:  at most this many alleles observed per locus

How many SNPs remain? 
`bcftools view 14_extract_mhap/mpileup_calls_SNP_only_biallelic_q20_dp10_Fmiss_0.1.bcf | grep -vE '^#' | wc -l`      

Filter on MAF?     
```
bcftools +fill-tags 14_extract_mhap/mpileup_calls_SNP_only_biallelic_q20_dp10_Fmiss_0.1.bcf -Ob -o 14_extract_mhap/mpileup_calls_SNP_only_biallelic_q20_dp10_Fmiss_0.1_w_AF.bcf  -- -t AF

bcftools view -i 'INFO/AF > 0.01' 14_extract_mhap/mpileup_calls_SNP_only_biallelic_q20_dp10_Fmiss_0.1_w_AF.bcf -Ob -o 14_extract_mhap/mpileup_calls_SNP_only_biallelic_q20_dp10_Fmiss_0.1_w_AF_maf0.01.bcf
```



### 07. Call microhaplotypes ###
Here we will use microTyper2.0 to pull the information out of the bam files in the mapped folder, but first we need to create a Position File to provide to microTyper2.0, based on the VCF with all the SNPs in it.         

```
# Create the content of the position file
bcftools view 14_extract_mhap/mpileup_calls_SNP_only_biallelic_q20_dp10_Fmiss_0.1_w_AF_maf0.01.bcf | grep -vE '^#' - | awk '{ print $1 "\t" $2 "\t" "S" "\t" $5 }' - > 14_extract_mhap/position_file_body.txt

# note: as per microtyper README, this is in the format of 
# Locus	RefPos	Type	ValidAlt 

# Add a header to the position file
echo -e "Locus \t RefPos \t Type \t ValidAlt" > 14_extract_mhap/position_file.txt && cat 14_extract_mhap/position_file_body.txt >> 14_extract_mhap/position_file.txt

# Clean up
rm 14_extract_mhap/position_file_body.txt
 
```

Before proceeding, make sure that your position file and your reference genome still match in names.    


Now that the position file is made (and ref genome cleaned up if needed), we can extract genotypes as follows:     
```
mtype2 -f 13_mapped_mhap/*.sorted.bam -p 14_extract_mhap/position_file.txt -r 00_archive/cgig_v.1.0_amplicon_ref.fna -d 10 -c .99 -o 14_extract_mhap/genos.txt
```

This will output a file called `14_extract_mhap/genos.txt`.           

Use the amplitools function in R to convert from the above format to a genepop file using EFGL package:     
`mtype2_to_genepop(input.FN = "14_extract_mhap/genos.txt", output.FN = "14_extract_mhap/genos.gen", simplify_names = TRUE)`          

This will output a histogram of the number of alleles per locus, as well as a genepop with the name as specified as the output.FN above.      

The genepop can be read into R using the following command:     
`obj <- read.genepop(file = "genepop.gen", ncode = 2)`      
...then you can use the `simple_pop_stats` repository from there.     

